A FEW MILES south of Soledad, the Salinas River drops in close
to the hillside bank and runs deep and green. The water is warm
too, for it has slipped twinkling over the yellow sands in the
sunlight before reaching the narrow pool. On one side of the river
the golden foothill slopes curve up to the strong and rocky Gabilan
mountains, but on the valley side the water is lined with trees -
willows fresh and green with every spring, carrying in their lower
leaf junctures the debris of the winter’s flooding; and sycamores
with mottled, white, recumbent limbs and branches that arch over
the pool. On the sandy bank under the trees the leaves lie deep
and so crisp that a lizard makes a great skittering if he runs
among them. Rabbits come out of the brush to sit on the sand in
the evening, and the damp flats are covered with the night tracks
of ’coons, and with the spread pads of dogs from the ranches, and
with the split-wedge tracks of deer that come to drink in the dark.
There is a path through the willows and among the sycamores, a
path beaten hard by boys coming down from the ranches to swim
in the deep pool, and beaten hard by tramps who come wearily
down from the highway in the evening to jungle-up near water. In
front of the low horizontal limb of a giant sycamore there is an ash
pile made by many fires; the limb is worn smooth by men who
have sat on it.
Evening of a hot day started the little wind to moving among the
leaves. The shade climbed up the hills toward the top. On the sand
banks the rabbits sat as quietly as little gray, sculptured stones.
And then from the direction of the state highway came the sound
of footsteps on crisp sycamore leaves. The rabbits hurried
noiselessly for cover. A stilted heron labored up into the air and
pounded down river. For a moment the place was lifeless, and
then two men emerged from the path and came into the opening
by the green pool.
They had walked in single file down the path, and even in the
open one stayed behind the other. Both were dressed in denim
trousers and in denim coats with brass buttons. Both wore black,
shapeless hats and both carried tight blanket rolls slung over
their shoulders. The first man was small and quick, dark of face,
with restless eyes and sharp, strong features. Every part of him
was defined: small, strong hands, slender arms, a thin and bony
nose. Behind him walked his opposite, a huge man, shapeless of
face, with large, pale eyes, with wide, sloping shoulders; and he
walked heavily, dragging his feet a little, the way a bear drags his
paws. His arms did not swing at his sides, but hung loosely.
The first man stopped short in the clearing, and the follower
nearly ran over him. He took off his hat and wiped the sweat-band
with his forefinger and snapped the moisture off. His huge
companion dropped his blankets and flung himself down and
drank from the surface of the green pool; drank with long gulps,
snorting into the water like a horse. The small man stepped
nervously beside him.
"Lennie!" he said sharply. "Lennie, for God’ sakes don’t drink so
much." Lennie continued to snort into the pool. The small man
leaned over and shook him by the shoulder. "Lennie. You gonna be
sick like you was last night."
Lennie dipped his whole head under, hat and all, and then he sat
up on the bank and his hat dripped down on his blue coat and ran
down his back. "Tha’s good," he said. "You drink some, George.
You take a good big drink." He smiled happily.
George unslung his bindle and dropped it gently on the bank. "I
ain’t sure it’s good water," he said. "Looks kinda scummy."
Lennie dabb1ed his big paw in the water and wiggled his fingers
so the water arose in little splashes; rings widened across the pool
to the other side and came back again. Lennie watched them go.
"Look, George. Look what I done."
George knelt beside the pool and drank from his hand with quick
scoops. "Tastes all right," he admitted. "Don’t really seem to be
running, though. You never oughta drink water when it ain’t
running, Lennie," he said hopelessly. "You’d drink out of a gutter
if you was thirsty." He threw a scoop of water into his face and
rubbed it about with his hand, under his chin and around the back
of his neck. Then he replaced his hat, pushed himself back from
the river, drew up his knees and embraced them. Lennie, who had
been watching, imitated George exactly. He pushed himself back,
drew up his knees, embraced them, looked over to George to see
whether he had it just right. He pulled his hat down a little more
over his eyes, the way George’s hat was.
George stared morosely at the water. The rims of his eyes were
red with sun glare. He said angrily, "We could just as well of rode
clear to the ranch if that bastard bus driver knew what he was
talkin’ about. ‘Jes’ a little stretch down the highway,’ he says. ‘Jes’
a little stretch.’ God damn near four miles, that’s what it was!
Didn’t wanta stop at the ranch gate, that’s what. Too God damn
lazy to pull up. Wonder he isn’t too damn good to stop in Soledad
at all. Kicks us out and says, ‘Jes’ a little stretch down the road.’ I
bet it was
more than four miles. Damn hot day."
Lennie looked timidly over to him. "George?"
"Yeah, what ya want?"
"Where we goin’, George?"
The little man jerked down the brim of his hat and scowled over
at Lennie. "So yon forgot that awready, did you? I gotta tell you
again, do I? Jesus Christ, you’re a crazy bastard!"
"I forgot," Lennie said softly. "I tried not to forget. Honest to God I
did, George."
"O.K.- O.K. I’ll tell ya again. I ain’t got nothing to do. Might jus’
as well spen’ all my time tellin’ you things and then you forget
’em, and I tell you again."
"Tried and tried," said Lennie, "but it didn’t do no good. I
remember about the rabbits, George."
"The hell with the rabbits. That’s all you ever can remember is
them rabbits. O.K.! Now you listen and this time you got to
remember so we don’t get in no trouble. You remember settin’ in
that gutter on Howard Street and watchin’ that blackboard?"
Lennie’s face broke into a delighted smile. "Why sure, George. I
remember that.... but.... what’d we do then? I remember some girls
come by and you says.... you say."
"The hell with what I says. You remember about us goin’ into
Murray and Ready’s, and they give us work cards and bus
tickets?"
"Oh, sure, George. I remember that now." His hands went quickly
into his side coat pockets. He said gently, "George.... I ain’t got
mine. I musta lost it," He looked down at the ground in despair.
"You never had none, you crazy bastard. I got both of ’em here.
Think I’d let you carry your own work card?"
Lennie grinned with relief. "I.... I thought I put it in my side
pocket." His hand went into the pocket again.
George looked sharply at him. "What’d you take outa that
pocket?"
"Ain’t a thing in my pocket," Lennie said cleverly.
"I know there ain’t. You got it in your hand. What you got in your
hand - hidin’ it?"
"I ain’t got nothin’, George, Honest."
"Come on, give it here."
Lennie held his closed hand away from George's direction. "It’s
only a mouse, George."
"A mouse? A live mouse?"
"Uh-uh. Jus’ a dead mouse, George. I didn’ kill it. ’ Honest! I
found it. I found it dead."
"Give it here!" said George.
"Aw, leave me have it, George."
"Give it
here!"
Lennie’s closed hand slowly obeyed. George took the mouse and
threw it across the pool to the other side, among the brush. "What
you want of a dead mouse, anyways?"
"I could pet it with my thumb while we walked along," said
Lennie.
"Well, you ain’t petting no mice while you walk with me. You
remember where we’re goin’ now?"
Lennie looked startled and then in embarrassment hid his face
against his knees. "I forgot again."
"Jesus Christ," George said resignedly. "Well - look, we’re gonna
work on a ranch like the one we come from up north"
"Up north?"
"In Weed."
"Oh, sure. I remember. In Weed."
"That ranch we’re goin’ to is right down there about a quarter
mile. We’re gonna go in an’ see the boss. Now, look - I’ll give him
the work tickets, but you ain’t gonna say a word. You jus’ stand
there and don’t say nothing. If he finds out what a crazy bastard
you are, we won’t get no job, but if he sees ya work before he hears
ya talk, we’re set. Ya got that?"
"Sure, George. Sure I got it."
"O.K. Now when we go in to see the boss, what you gonna do?"
"I.... I," Lennie thought. His face grew tight with thought. "I....
ain’t gonna say nothin’. Jus’ gonna stan’ there."
"Good boy. That’s swell. You say that over two, three times so you
sure won’t forget it."
Lennie droned to himself softly, "I ain’t gonna say nothin’.... I
ain’t gonna say nothin’.... I ain’t gonna say nothin’."
"O.K.," said George. "An’ you ain’t gonna do no bad things like you
done in Weed, neither."
Lennie looked puzzled. "Like I done in Weed?"
"Oh, so ya forgot that too, did ya. Well, I ain’t gonna remind ya,
fear ya do it again."
A light of understanding broke on Lennie’s face. "They run us
outa Weed," he exploded triumphantly.
"Run us out, hell," said George disgustedly. "We run. They was
lookin’ for us, but they didn’t catch us.